Release notes for AUCTeX 13.1 with preview-latex
================================================

AUCTeX provides by far the most wide-spread and sophisticated
environment for editing LaTeX, TeX, ConTeXt and Texinfo documents with
Emacs.  Combined with packages like RefTeX, flyspell and others it is
pretty much without peer as a comprehensive authoring solution for a
large variety of operating system platforms and TeX distributions.  It
supports document-dependent completion and syntax highlighting, easily
accessible menus, jumping to error locations in the source file, a
number of editing shortcuts, intelligent indentation and filling of
text during entry, and WYSIWYG previews of graphical elements like
math formulas right in the Emacs source buffer, by virtue of its
preview-latex component.

One part of the preview-latex subsystem is the central `preview.sty'
file that is independently useful for a number of applications and is
available in unbundled form from CTAN.[1]

AUCTeX needs volunteers in particular for non-programming tasks:
documentation writing, tutorials, translations, reference material,
sleuth work, testing.

New features and fixed bugs in this release
-------------------------------------------

In math environments 'gather', 'gather*', 'gathered', 'multline'
and 'multline*', fill commands such as 'M-q' and 'C-c C-q C-e' are
disabled.  This sorts out the inconsistency between those and
'equation', 'displaymath' environments, in latter of which filling
is already disabled.

If you want filling in such environments, customize
'LaTeX-indent-environment-list' to remove them.

Auto fill continues to work in such environment anyway.

In addition, AUCTeX adds support of alignment at '&' sign in
'align'-like environments such as 'alignat', 'aligned' and so on,
as well as 'matrix'-like environments such as 'pmatrix', 'bmatrix'
and so on.

Now two commands 'Texindex' and 'Texi2dvi' are available when you
type 'C-c C-c' in Texinfo mode.  The command 'Texindex' runs
'texindex' on index files and 'Texi2dvi' runs 'pdftexi2dvi' or
'texi2dvi' according to the value of 'TeX-PDF-mode'.

So you can typeset Texinfo documents into PDF or DVI format from
within AUCTeX.

AUCTeX's own help messages for LaTeX errors are now shown only for
LaTeX runs.  AUCTeX shows raw error/warning messages found in
'.log' files for runs of formats other than LaTeX, such as plain
TeX, ConTeXt and Texinfo, as it does even for LaTeX runs when it
can't find a matching entry in its own help message catalogue.

Due to this change, customize option 'TeX-error-description-list'
can no longer have a fallback entry that matches any error.  If
your customized value includes such entry, typically '(".*" . "No
help available")', please remove it.

Two functions 'TeX-split-string' and 'TeX-assoc' are now obsolete
and will be removed in future release.  If your personal code uses
these functions, use 'split-string' and 'assoc-string' instead.

The function 'TeX-read-key-val' now accepts a function call as
second argument.  This change should help AUCTeX style writers who
use 'TeX-arg-key-val' and have to deal with dynamic key-values.
Example of usage:
     (TeX-add-style-hook "foo"
      (lambda ()
        (TeX-add-symbols
         '("bar" (TeX-arg-key-val (function-returning-key-val))))))

Since AUCTeX 12.2, 'C-x C-w' accidentally disabled the parse on
save in that buffer, even when you enabled 'TeX-auto-save' option.
This bug was fixed.

AUCTeX now requires GNU Emacs 24.3 or higher.

Old implementations for viewers were discarded, as announced long
before.  The variables 'TeX-output-view-style' and 'TeX-view-style'
have no effect now.  The former placeholders '%v' and '%vv' in
'TeX-command-list' are ignored.

AUCTeX now uses lexical binding which has been introduced in Emacs
24.  This change should have no user-visible effect and require no
manual adaptions except in the following cases.

   - Entries added to the customization variable 'TeX-expand-list'
     also had access to variables 'command' and 'pos'.  Those are
     now properly declared and named 'TeX-expand-command' and
     'TeX-expand-pos'.

   - Entries added to the customization variable 'TeX-expand-list'
     had access to a variable 'file' which was bound to
     'TeX-active-master', i.e., it evaluated to either the master
     or region file.  This usage must be replaced with either
     'TeX-active-master' or 'TeX-active-master-with-quotes'.

   - Viewer entries in 'TeX-view-program-list' also had access to a
     variable 'file' which was bound to the name of the master or
     region file without extension.  Instead, the function
     'TeX-active-master' has to be used now.

   - Macro argument parsing functions could set a variable
     'exit-mark' to the buffer position where point should be left
     after all arguments have been read.  This variable is now
     named 'TeX-exit-mark'.

   - The functions in 'LaTeX-section-hook' had access or modified
     the previously undeclared variables 'title', 'name', 'level',
     'done-mark', and 'toc'.  These variables are now properly
     declared and have the 'LaTeX-' prefix, e.g.,
     'LaTeX-done-mark'.

   - The functions in 'ConTeXt-numbered-section-hook' and
     'ConTeXt-unnumbered-section-hook' had access or modified the
     previously undeclared variables 'title', 'name', 'level',
     'done-mark', and 'reference'.  These variables are now
     properly declared and have the 'ConTeXt-' prefix, e.g.,
     'ConTeXt-title'.

   - The functions in 'TeX-translate-location-hook' could access
     and modify the free variables 'file', 'line', 'error',
     'offset', 'context', and 'string'.  Those are now properly
     declared variables with the prefix 'TeX-translate-location-',
     e.g., 'TeX-translate-location-file'.

The constant 'LaTeX-dialect' has been renamed to 'TeX-dialect' and
moved from 'latex.el' to 'tex.el'.  'LaTeX-dialect' now is an
obsolete alias.

The style 'latexinfo.el' is removed from AUCTeX.  'latexinfo.el'
was meant to support latexinfo which in return was a LaTeX-2.09
extension of Texinfo, but didn't manage to replace Texinfo.

The style 'siunitx.el' is updated to support package version 3.
Key-value options provided by older package versions are removed,
deprecated macros and units are not supported anymore.

AUCTeX has preliminary support for LaTeX-hooks.  Hooks provided by
LaTeX kernel are known and available for completion in
'\AddToHook', '\RemoveFromHook' and '\AddToHookNext'.

AUCTeX is now able to place all generated output files, including
those that are produced by applications running under AUCTeX,
temporary files related to region processing and preview-latex
files, in an output directory.  To use this feature, set the new
user option 'TeX-output-dir' to the absolute path of the output
directory or a relative path which would be interpreted as being
relative to the master file in a multifile document.

Note that this feature doesn't work if the document includes sub
file placed in sub directory below the main file via '\include'
command.

Many other bugs were fixed.

Requirements
------------

It is required that you use at least GNU Emacs 24.3.

The preview-latex subsystem requires image support.

You'll also need a working LaTeX installation and Ghostscript.
dvipng[2] (version 1.4 or later), a very fast DVI converter, can be
used to speed up the conversion.

Availability
------------

The easiest way for getting AUCTeX is installing it with GNU ELPA, see
<URL:https://elpa.gnu.org/packages/auctex.html> for more information.
Other download options are available at
<URL:https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/auctex/>.  At release time, we provide the
source tarball.  You can also use versions of Emacs that already
include AUCTeX or a software package management system for your
operating system which provides you with the latest release.

A separate directory for each release contains some stuff from the
tarball, such as ChangeLog, printable manuals, and a reference sheet.
The download area is mirrored to the directory support/auctex on CTAN.
AUCTeX is licensed under the GNU General Public License version 3.

You'll find more information at the web site of AUCTeX
<URL:https://www.gnu.org/software/auctex/>, including its mailing list
addresses.

Future development and additional information
---------------------------------------------

AUCTeX is proceeding as a GNU project with the long-term intent of
merging it into Emacs.  For that reason, all new contributors need to
assign copyright to their contributions to the FSF (the usual
procedure for Emacs contributors).  The same holds for past
contributors.  The principal authors and maintainers have already done
so, but it would require a diligent and diplomatic volunteer to find
and ask the rest.

Current AUCTeX managers are Arash Esbati, Mosè Giordano, and Tassilo
Horn.  Everybody is welcome to contribute to the project by reporting
bugs and suggesting improvements, but the most effective way of
helping AUCTeX development remains volunteering for tasks.

The following people contributed to this release series (in
alphabetical order): Ivan Andrus, Ralf Angeli, Masayuki Ataka,
Mohammad Hossein Bateni, Fabrice Ben Hamouda, Thomas Baumann, Vincent
Belaïche, Berend de Boer, Alex Branham, Uwe Brauer, Ken Brown, Joshua
Buhl, Jean-François Burnol, Patrice Dumas, Arash Esbati, Werner Fink,
Miguel Frasson, Peter S. Galbraith, Mosè Giordano, Andrea Greselin,
Patrick Gundlach, Abdul-Lateef Haji-Ali, Jobst Hoffmann, Tassilo Horn,
Yvon Hevel, Orlando Iovino, Mads Jensen, Arne Jørgensen, Philip
Kaludercic, David Kastrup, Ikumi Keita, Philip Kime, Oleh Krehel,
Joost Kremers, Frank Küster, Jan-Åke Larsson, Matthew Leach, Brian
Leung, Antoine Levitt, Leo Liu, Vladimir Lomov, Stefan Monnier, Dan
Nicolaescu, Piet van Oostrum, Pieter Pareit, Nicolas Richard, Augusto
Ritter Stoffel, Florent Rougon, Santiago Saavedra, Davide
G. M. Salvetti, Rüdiger Sonderfeld, Holger Sparr, Mike Sperber, Reiner
Steib, Christian Schlauer, Shiro Takeda, Mark Trettin (Please accept
our apologies if we forgot somebody.)

Footnotes:

[1]  <URL:https://www.ctan.org/pkg/preview>

[2]  dvipng is available via its project page
<URL:https://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/dvipng> and from CTAN.
